# Shifting-Dynamics-of-Cartel-Violence
The respective codes associated to the article.

1.- The "Limpieza de datos.ipynb" file is focused on data cleaning and applying corresponding filters to the database.

2.- The "Artículo Base al Español.ipynb" script translates and corrects grammatical errors in the database.

3.- "Artículo_Inglés.ipynb" file is focused on generating all kinds of non-geographic graphics. It contains scatter plots, bar charts, histograms, tables and heatmaps. The important outputs are those corresponding to the numbers: 
  *Numbers 2, 4, 6, 7, 15, 17, 19, 20 and 24 offer a general overview of the results of the situation.
  *Numbers 27 and 28 show the activity and intensity of the cartels.
  *Numbers 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42 and 43 show comparisons between six-year periods, using totals and two specific cartels, considering deaths and events.
The following figures in the article correspond to this code: Fig. 1 A) and 1 B), Fig. 2 B) and 2 C), Fig. 3 B) and Fig. 4 B).

4.- "Artículo.R" is a file that focuses on making a geographical map of Mexico, politically separated by states, showing deaths based on color intensity. Figure 1 C) correspond to this code in the article.

5.- "Artículo3.R" is a file that focuses on making a geographical map of Mexico, politically separated by municipalities, showing deaths based on color intensity. This script uses a dataframe generated by the "Correlaciones_Artículo_ING.ipynb" file. Figure 1 D) correspond to this code in the article.

6.- "Correlaciones_Artículo_ING.ipynb" This file focuses on calculating cartel correlations and graphing the main results.

7.- The "Artículo4.R" code creates maps of Mexico of the events for each six-year term using pairs of cartels, the spatial location of the event and a disk to illustrate the number of events in the same place. The following figures in the article correspond to this code: Fig. 2 A), Fig. 3 A) and Fig. 4 A).

Important links related to databases:

The source of the database we used for the article:
   UCPD. (2022). Department of Peace and Conflict Research (México). Link: https://ucdp.uu.se/encyclopedia

The data of the base Mexico map divided by state extracted from the INEGI through the CONABIO portal:
   INEGI. (2018). Catálogo de metadatos geográficos. Comisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad. Link:   
   http://geoportal.conabio.gob.mx/metadatos/doc/html/muni_2018gw.html

The data of the base Mexico map divided by minicipalities extracted from the UNAM IDEA portal:
   INEGI. (2010). Censo 2010 (Estatal). Link: https://www.gits.igg.unam.mx/idea/descarga
